docs/_source/02_docker.rst, before:

.. include:: global.rst

==========
Containers
==========

.. image:: ../images/container-4203677_1920.jpg
   :align: center

|

Containerization is the process of generating a fully functioning software ecosystem that
includes code and dependencies for part or all of a project. The most popular and common
tool for realizing containerization is Docker. Using Docker, we can programatically build
an environment for our project, and pass the entirety of this encapsulated environment
from our local development machine, into the Continuous Integration pipeline for testing,
and eventually into our production environment. Containerization helps us by offering a
consistent operating experience across environments.

.. index::
   single: Containerization
   single: Docker

Software Infrastructure and Platforms are the foundations upon which our scripts, code, and
projects are founded. It is more desirable to create projects that are built
and replaced frequently, than it is to attempt to upgrade and repair the infrastructure, platforms,
and project code. Attempts to upgrade and repair in place, such as with bare metal platforms
for example, quickly reveal great difficulty in maintaining consistency with the project source,
as well as issues keeping operating system packages current yet still compatible with the project.
Imagine a situation where an upgrade to a package is necessary to meet security requirements,
but this very same upgrade means the project stop working resulting in angry users and customers.
Certainly not a situation we ever like to find ourselves in.

There is obvious advantage of being able to quickly stand up new clones of our project to
replace existing instances that may be outdated, insecure, etc. 
The idea of immutability [#]_, in reference to software, is the degree to which something, 
our running project in this case, can be changed. Immutability is desirable, in that we wish to
be able to simply replace outdated instances of our project in their entirety. Upgrading and
patching are inherently problematic activities, high cost in terms of time, effort and money, 
that we have the technology to dissociate from.
With containerization, we can more easily achieve immutability across the
software lifecycle. 

.. index::
   single: Immutability

Ephemerality is the concept of something being transitory in nature, existing only
briefly [#]_. Using immutable containers makes it easier to realize infrastructure and hosts
that are ephemeral. Rather than spending a great deal of time patching and upgrading one or
more hosts as we might in a traditional project stack that uses virtual machines or bare metal, 
we're going to use Docker to create a new container in place of the old one. In other words, we're
running our project in containers that are immutable and ephemeral to the degree possible.

.. [#] https://www.hashicorp.com/resources/what-is-mutable-vs-immutable-infrastructure/
.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemerality

.. index::
   single: Ephemerality

Using Docker gives us the benefit of being able to switch quickly between base operating system
images with just a few lines of code change to our project. See the Docker website for
instructions on how to install and configure Docker [#]_ . A properly functioning Docker
setup on your local machine is a requirement for the exercises we will do later.

.. [#] https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/

Once you have Docker installed and running on your workstation, take a look at 
the two example files below. For now it's OK to see them and
get a general familiarity with their contents. Later we will use these files to 
create containers for our projects.

**********
Dockerfile
**********

The Dockerfile is our basic unit of containerization. That is to say, our
containers, and the applications they contain, are defined by the Dockerfile. This Dockerfile
will dictate how we provision resources and include operating system essentials and packages
inside our container. Each Dockerfile is predicated on a base image, such as Python/Debian 10 as 
shown in the example below.

Consider a directory named 
`Docker <https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework/tree/master/docker>`_ 
and a file called 
`Dockerfile <https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework/blob/master/docker/Dockerfile>`_ within
this directory. Note the capitalization of the first letter in the file name.
Some IDE's will key off this file and allow for additional syntax highlighting.

.. index::
   single: Dockerfile

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: An example Dockerfile
   :name: Dockerfile
   :linenos:

   FROM python:3.9-buster
   LABEL maintainer "Franklin Diaz <franklin@bitsmasher.net>"

   ENV DEBIAN_FRONTEND noninteractive
   
   ADD . /project
   WORKDIR /project
   
   RUN apt update; \
      apt -y install apt-utils

A valid Dockerfile begins with the **FROM** instruction. This instruction specifies the base image
that we will use to build our project on. These base images come from the `Docker Hub repositories`_.
We are setting an environment variable **DEBIAN_FRONEND** to the value of `noninteractive`, which
will cause the `apt` command to skip or ignore any interactive menus that are encountered during
execution of the apt command, since these would cause our builds to "hang up" at an inaccessible
interactive prompt. The **ADD** and **WORKDIR** directives are meant to cause Docker to use the `/workdir`
directory as the root of the project "inside" the container. Finally, we are directing Docker to
**RUN** and apt update and install the apt-utils package.

.. _`Docker Hub repositories`: https://docs.docker.com/docker-hub/repos/

******************
docker-compose.yml
******************

A file called docker-compose.yml will exist alongside our `Dockerfile`
in our Docker directory. The docker-compose.yml file allows us to manage multiple Docker containers 
for one or more applications. We will add this file to our project to illustrate it's
composition and give ourselves the ability to extend our work later, as needed.

.. index::
   single: docker-compose.yml

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: An example docker-compose.yml file
   :name: docker-compose.yml
   :linenos:
   
   version: '3'
   services:
   devsecops:
      hostname: devsecops
      container_name: devsecops
      volumes:
         - ..:/project
      build:
         context: ..
         dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile

Recall that we set our **WORKDIR** to `/project` in the Dockerfile. Following that
example, we now have `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` in the directory `/project/docker`.
The `docker-compose.yml` file begins with a version specification. It's important to 
note that the commands and structure of `docker-compose.yml` can vary widely based on 
this version. While versions cannot be mixed, all version are valid with respect to 
docker-compose itself. Wew specify a service named "devsecops", and assign a host and 
container name. Under "volumes" we are mounting the base of the project directory in the 
host filesystem as "/project" in the container filesystem. The build "directive" tells 
docker-compose how to locate the Dockerfile we wish to use for the containers.

**************
Testing it Out
**************

With Docker properly installed and our two configuration files in place, we can now
try out our configuration. Please see (:numref:`myFig1`) for an illustration of how to 
lay out the project files in your local filesystem.

.. raw:: latex

    \clearpage

.. graphviz::
   :caption: Project Directory
   :align: center
   :name: myFig1

   digraph folders {
      "rapid_secdev_framework" [shape=folder];
      "docker" [shape=folder];
      "docker-compose.yml" [shape=rect];
      "Dockerfile" [shape=rect];
      "rapid_secdev_framework" -> "docker";
      "docker" -> "Dockerfile";
      "docker" -> "docker-compose.yml";
   }

Steps
*****

- Create the "rapid_secdev_framework" folder.
- From that folder, create another folder called "docker"
- Cut and paste the Dockerfile into the docker folder.
- Cut and paste the docker-compose.yml file into the docker folder.

Here is an example of the shell commands to accomplish these steps. You can
substitue vi for your favorite text editor. Note that typing the "docker-compose" 
command on line 6 will reference the devsecops "service" we specified on line 3
of the docker-compose.yml file.

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Steps to test Docker configuration.
   :name: Steps to test Docker configuration.
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 6

   mkdir rapid_secdev_framework
   cd rapid_secdev_framework
   mkdir docker
   vi docker/Dockerfile
   vi docker/docker-compose.yml
   docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml build devsecops

Testing from GitHub
*******************

It should be noted that the link to the GitHub repository for the accompanying project
for this book is
`https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework`_. In the next chapter we will
explore how to "clone" the project repository and do our work directory from there.

.. _`https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework`: https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework

***********************
Container Orchestration
***********************

Kubernetes is an example, perhaps the penultimate example, of a Container Orchestrator. Folks
throughout the software and security communities are using Kubernetes these
days, and with good reason.  It's adoption as a means to manage and replicate
containers, and scale the applications they contain, has been nothing short of revolutionary.
Admins and developers can do more, better work, albeit at the expense of introduction yet
another paradigm to learn, and some amount of complexity.

An orchestrator helps us achieve immutability, and scale to meet user demand quickly and easily
by abstracting away concerns that come with operating workloads in a bare metal or VM 
environment.

As Kubernetes and other orchestrators 

.. index::
   single: Kubernetes
   single: Orchestration

******************
A Bit About Podman
******************

Podman is an Open Source alternative container engine from the Open Containers Initiative (OCI).
The Podman service is purportedly capable of being a drop-in replacement for Docker, although
it only runs on Linux hosts at the time of this writing.

The advantage to running Podman is, it is a more secure alternative [#]_ to Docker for creating 
containers. You can install Podman by following the instructions [#]_ at their web site.

.. [#] https://opensource.com/article/18/10/podman-more-secure-way-run-containers
.. [#] https://podman.io/getting-started/installation.html

Here is the change for the `unprivileged_userns_clone` error:

.. code-block:: bash

   thedevilsvoice@grimoire::~$ podman
   cannot clone: Operation not permitted
   user namespaces are not enabled in /proc/sys/kernel/unprivileged_userns_clone
   Error: could not get runtime: cannot re-exec process
   thedevilsvoice@grimoire::~$ sudo sysctl kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone=1
   thedevilsvoice@grimoire::~$ podman-v
   podman version 1.9.1

Once podman is installed properly you should be able to `alias docker=podman`
and use it as a drop in replacement for docker.

.. index::
   single: Podman
   single: Open Containers Initiative (OCI)

Commit message:

tweaks after tuesday review (#44)
* tweaks after tuesday review

* remove more instances of cloudlab name

* fix podman text

* [Review] Chapter 2: Spell Check errors (#43)

* spell check modifications

* albeit I missed this one

* a few more

Co-authored-by: Franklin D <franklin@bitsmasher.net>

* moved up a line to make things read better (#42)

Co-authored-by: Franklin D <franklin@bitsmasher.net>

* tweaks after tuesday review

* remove more instances of cloudlab name

* fix podman text

* tweak podman section

Co-authored-by: phreakinggeek <phreakinggeek@gmail.com>

docs/_source/02_docker.rst, after:

.. include:: global.rst

==========
Containers
==========

.. image:: ../images/container-4203677_1920.jpg
   :align: center

|

Containerization is the process of generating a fully functioning software ecosystem that
includes code and dependencies for part or all of a project. The most popular and common
tool for realizing containerization is Docker. Using Docker, we can programatically build
an environment for our project, and pass the entirety of this encapsulated environment
from our local development machine, into the Continuous Integration pipeline for testing,
and eventually into our production environment. Containerization helps us by offering a
consistent operating experience across environments.

.. index::
   single: Containerization
   single: Docker

Software Infrastructure and Platforms are the foundations upon which our scripts, code, and
projects are founded. It is more desirable to create projects that are built
and replaced frequently, than it is to attempt to upgrade and repair the infrastructure, platforms,
and project code. Attempts to upgrade and repair in place, such as with bare metal platforms
for example, quickly reveal great difficulty in maintaining consistency with the project source,
as well as issues keeping operating system packages current yet still compatible with the project.
Imagine a situation where an upgrade to a package is necessary to meet security requirements,
but this very same upgrade means the project stop working resulting in angry users and customers.
Certainly not a situation we ever like to find ourselves in.

There is obvious advantage of being able to quickly stand up new clones of our project to
replace existing instances that may be outdated, insecure, etc. 
The idea of immutability [#]_, in reference to software, is the degree to which something, 
our running project in this case, can be changed. Immutability is desirable, in that we wish to
be able to simply replace outdated instances of our project in their entirety. Upgrading and
patching are inherently problematic activities, high cost in terms of time, effort and money, 
that we have the technology to dissociate from.
With containerization, we can more easily achieve immutability across the
software lifecycle. 

.. index::
   single: Immutability

Ephemerality is the concept of something being transitory in nature, existing only
briefly [#]_. Using immutable containers makes it easier to realize infrastructure and hosts
that are ephemeral. Rather than spending a great deal of time patching and upgrading one or
more hosts as we might in a traditional project stack that uses virtual machines or bare metal, 
we're going to use Docker to create a new container in place of the old one. In other words, we're
running our project in containers that are immutable and ephemeral to the degree possible.

.. [#] https://www.hashicorp.com/resources/what-is-mutable-vs-immutable-infrastructure/
.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemerality

.. index::
   single: Ephemerality

Using Docker gives us the benefit of being able to switch quickly between base operating system
images with just a few lines of code change to our project. See the Docker website for
instructions on how to install and configure Docker [#]_ . A properly functioning Docker
setup on your local machine is a requirement for the exercises we will do later.

.. [#] https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/

Once you have Docker installed and running on your workstation, take a look at 
the two example files below. For now it's OK to see them and
get a general familiarity with their contents. Later we will use these files to 
create containers for our projects.

**********
Dockerfile
**********

The Dockerfile is our basic unit of containerization. That is to say, our
containers, and the applications they contain, are defined by the Dockerfile. This Dockerfile
will dictate how we provision resources and include operating system essentials and packages
inside our container. Each Dockerfile is predicated on a base image, such as Python/Debian 10 as 
shown in the example below.

Consider a directory named 
`Docker <https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework/tree/master/docker>`_ 
and a file called 
`Dockerfile <https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework/blob/master/docker/Dockerfile>`_ within
this directory. Note the capitalization of the first letter in the file name.
Some IDE's will key off this file and allow for additional syntax highlighting.

.. index::
   single: Dockerfile

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: An example Dockerfile
   :name: Dockerfile
   :linenos:

   FROM python:3.9-buster
   LABEL maintainer "Kevin Flynn <user@example.com>"

   ENV DEBIAN_FRONTEND noninteractive
   
   ADD . /project
   WORKDIR /project
   
   RUN apt update; \
      apt -y install apt-utils

A valid Dockerfile begins with the **FROM** instruction. This instruction specifies the base image
that we will use to build our project on. These base images come from the `Docker Hub repositories`_.
We are setting an environment variable **DEBIAN_FRONEND** to the value of `noninteractive`, which
will cause the `apt` command to skip or ignore any interactive menus that are encountered during
execution of the apt command, since these would cause our builds to "hang up" at an inaccessible
interactive prompt. The **ADD** and **WORKDIR** directives are meant to cause Docker to use the `/workdir`
directory as the root of the project "inside" the container. Finally, we are directing Docker to
**RUN** and apt update and install the apt-utils package.

.. _`Docker Hub repositories`: https://docs.docker.com/docker-hub/repos/

******************
docker-compose.yml
******************

A file called docker-compose.yml will exist alongside our `Dockerfile`
in our Docker directory. The docker-compose.yml file allows us to manage multiple Docker containers 
for one or more applications. We will add this file to our project to illustrate it's
composition and give ourselves the ability to extend our work later, as needed.

.. index::
   single: docker-compose.yml

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: An example docker-compose.yml file
   :name: docker-compose.yml
   :linenos:
   
   version: '3'
   services:
   devsecops:
      hostname: devsecops
      container_name: devsecops
      volumes:
         - ..:/project
      build:
         context: ..
         dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile

Recall that we set our **WORKDIR** to `/project` in the Dockerfile. Following that
example, we now have `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` in the directory `/project/docker`.
The `docker-compose.yml` file begins with a version specification. It's important to 
note that the commands and structure of `docker-compose.yml` can vary widely based on 
this version. While versions cannot be mixed, all version are valid with respect to 
docker-compose itself. Wew specify a service named "devsecops", and assign a host and 
container name. Under "volumes" we are mounting the base of the project directory in the 
host filesystem as "/project" in the container filesystem. The build "directive" tells 
docker-compose how to locate the Dockerfile we wish to use for the containers.

**************
Testing it Out
**************

With Docker properly installed and our two configuration files in place, we can now
try out our configuration. Please see (:numref:`myFig1`) for an illustration of how to 
lay out the project files in your local filesystem.

.. raw:: latex

    \clearpage

.. graphviz::
   :caption: Project Directory
   :align: center
   :name: myFig1

   digraph folders {
      "rapid_secdev_framework" [shape=folder];
      "docker" [shape=folder];
      "docker-compose.yml" [shape=rect];
      "Dockerfile" [shape=rect];
      "rapid_secdev_framework" -> "docker";
      "docker" -> "Dockerfile";
      "docker" -> "docker-compose.yml";
   }

Steps
*****

- Create the "rapid_secdev_framework" folder.
- From that folder, create another folder called "docker"
- Cut and paste the Dockerfile into the docker folder.
- Cut and paste the docker-compose.yml file into the docker folder.

Here is an example of the shell commands to accomplish these steps. You can
substitue vi for your favorite text editor. Note that typing the "docker-compose" 
command on line 6 will reference the devsecops "service" we specified on line 3
of the docker-compose.yml file.

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Steps to test Docker configuration.
   :name: Steps to test Docker configuration.
   :linenos:
   :emphasize-lines: 6

   mkdir rapid_secdev_framework
   cd rapid_secdev_framework
   mkdir docker
   vi docker/Dockerfile
   vi docker/docker-compose.yml
   docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml build devsecops

Testing from GitHub
*******************

It should be noted that the link to the GitHub repository for the accompanying project
for this book is
`https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework`_. In the next chapter we will
explore how to "clone" the project repository and do our work directory from there.

.. _`https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework`: https://github.com/hotpeppersec/rapid_secdev_framework

***********************
Container Orchestration
***********************

Kubernetes is an example, perhaps the penultimate example, of a Container Orchestrator. Folks
throughout the software and security communities are using Kubernetes these
days, and with good reason.  It's adoption as a means to manage and replicate
containers, and scale the applications they contain, has been nothing short of revolutionary.
Admins and developers can do more, better work, albeit at the expense of introduction yet
another paradigm to learn, and some amount of complexity.

An orchestrator helps us achieve immutability, and scale to meet user demand quickly and easily
by abstracting away concerns that come with operating workloads in a bare metal or VM 
environment.

As Kubernetes and other orchestrators 

.. index::
   single: Kubernetes
   single: Orchestration

*****************************
A Bit About Podman (Optional)
*****************************

The reason we mention Podman is because it is a more secure alternative [#]_ to 
Docker for creating containers. You will not need to have Podman working to work
through the exercies in this book.

.. [#] https://opensource.com/article/18/10/podman-more-secure-way-run-containers

Podman is an Open Source alternative container engine from the Open Containers Initiative (OCI).
The podman service is purportedly capable of being a drop-in replacement for Docker, although
it only runs on Linux hosts at the time of this writing. 

.. index::
   single: Podman
   single: Open Containers Initiative (OCI)

You can install Podman by following the instructions [#]_ at their web site.

.. [#] https://podman.io/getting-started/installation.html

Here is the change for the `unprivileged_userns_clone` error:

.. code-block:: bash

   user@devsecops::~$ podman
   cannot clone: Operation not permitted
   user namespaces are not enabled in /proc/sys/kernel/unprivileged_userns_clone
   Error: could not get runtime: cannot re-exec process
   user@devsecops::~$ sudo sysctl kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone=1
   user@devsecops::~$ podman-v
   podman version 1.9.1

Once podman is installed properly you should be able to `alias docker=podman`
and use it as a drop in replacement for docker.
